docs: broken-links (#2100)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/how-arbitrum-works/timeboost/timeboost-faq.mdx

---
title: 'Timeboost FAQ'
sidebar_label: 'FAQ'
description: 'Questions about Timeboost, how it works and how to use it.'
author: petevielhaber
sme: leeederek
user_story: As a current or prospective Arbitrum user, I have questions how Timeboost works and how to use it.
content_type: faq
---

### What's an `ELI5` on Timeboost?

Timeboost is a new transaction ordering policy for Arbitrum chains where any participant can bid for the right to have their transactions sequenced slightly faster than other transactions.

Notably, user transactions **will remain private until** they are sequenced, meaning no one can front-run or sandwich other users. Timeboost bid proceeds are collected by the Arbitrum DAO in either `ETH` or `ARB`, depending on DAO approval.

> ### As a typical user, will I notice any difference in my experience?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### As a user, will I notice any difference in my experience?
```

### How can I participate in Timeboost directly?

Interested parties can participate in the Timeboost auctions by depositing funds in the auction contract and sending bids to the autonomous auctioneer. We will have docs with more information.

The Timeboost auction is open to everyone; however, since auctions require a non-zero bid to win, we believe that only parties who can return from capturing arbitrage opportunities, backrunning opportunities, or reselling the express lane rights will benefit from participating.

The Timeboost protocol works behind the scenes with minimal impact on regular users while generating revenue for the Arbitrum DAO and opening up an additional revenue stream for sophisticated searchers.

### How much estimated revenue will this drive to the DAO?

Estimating how much revenue Timeboost will generate is complex and is based on many factors. There are no ways to confidently estimate the amount of arbitrage or backrunning opportunities that currently exist or will exist on Arbitrum chains in the future. The expectation is that the revenue will be significant on Arbitrum One due to the high amount of DeFi activity.

### What is the goal of Timeboost?

> e, all while preserving best-in-class user experience with both fast block times and protecting users from harmful MEV (e.g., front-running/sandwich attacks).

Reviewer: This sentence seems to be missing something.

> e, all while preserving best-in-class user experience with both fast block times and protecting users from harmful MEV (e.g., front-running/sandwich attacks).

Author: ```suggestion
As stated in the AIP, the goal of Timeboost is to give chain owners a way to capture available MEV on their chain and reduce spam from FCFS arbitrage, all while preserving best-in-class user experience with both fast block times and protecting users from harmful MEV (e.g., front-running/sandwich attacks).
```

Any proposed change, technical or otherwise, to Arbitrum One and Nova should prioritize ensuring the best user experience and optimal chain functioning ahead of other priorities. Timeboost explicitly embodies this principle in 3 ways:

> 1. Arbitrum One and Nova block times will remain industry-leading at 250ms even after Timeboost. What will change with Timeboost is that some transactions, specifically those not in the express lane, will be delayed to the next block. If there is an Express Lane controller for a given round, users will wait, at most, 450ms for their transactions to be sequenced (200ms proposed delay, plus 250ms block time). Furthermore, the time for a user's transaction to be sequenced will fall back to 250ms (or 100ms for Orbit chains) if there is no express lane controller. All of these values for Arbitrum One and Nova, both the block time and the nominal delay for non-express lane transactions, are controlled by governance and are far shorter than the block times seen on other child chains and even rival alternative parent chains (like Solana's 400ms block times).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Arbitrum One and Nova block times will remain industry-leading at 250ms even after Timeboost. What will change with Timeboost is that some transactions, specifically those not in the express lane, will be delayed to the next block. If there is an Express Lane controller for a given round, users will wait, at most, 450ms for their transactions to be sequenced (200ms proposed delay, plus 250ms block time). Furthermore, the time for a user's transaction to be sequenced will fall back to 250ms (or 100ms for Orbit chains) if there is no express lane controller. All of these values for Arbitrum One and Nova, both the block time and the nominal delay for non-express lane transactions, are controlled by governance and are far shorter than the block times seen on other child chains and even rival alternative parent chains (like Solana's 400ms block times).
```
```suggestion
1. Arbitrum One and Nova block times will remain industry-leading at 250ms even after Timeboost. What will change with Timeboost is that some transactions, specifically those not in the express lane, will be delayed to the next block. If there is an Express Lane controller for a given round, users will wait, at most, 450ms for their transactions to be sequenced (200ms proposed delay, plus 250ms block time). Furthermore, the time for a user's transaction to be sequenced will fall back to 250ms (or 100ms for Orbit chains) if there is no express lane controller. All of these values for Arbitrum One and Nova, both the block time and the nominal delay for non-express lane transactions, are controlled by governance and are far shorter than the block times seen on other child chains and even competing alternative parent chains (like Solana's 400ms block times).
```

> 1. Arbitrum One and Nova block times will remain industry-leading at 250ms even after Timeboost. What will change with Timeboost is that some transactions, specifically those not in the express lane, will be delayed to the next block. If there is an Express Lane controller for a given round, users will wait, at most, 450ms for their transactions to be sequenced (200ms proposed delay, plus 250ms block time). Furthermore, the time for a user's transaction to be sequenced will fall back to 250ms (or 100ms for Orbit chains) if there is no express lane controller. All of these values for Arbitrum One and Nova, both the block time and the nominal delay for non-express lane transactions, are controlled by governance and are far shorter than the block times seen on other child chains and even rival alternative parent chains (like Solana's 400ms block times).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Arbitrum One and Nova block times will remain industry-leading at 250ms even after Timeboost. What will change with Timeboost is that some transactions, specifically those not in the express lane, will be delayed to the next block. If there is an Express Lane controller for a given round, users will wait, at most, 450ms for their transactions to be sequenced (200ms proposed delay, plus 250ms block time). Furthermore, the time for a user's transaction to be sequenced will fall back to 250ms (or 100ms for Orbit chains) if there is no express lane controller. All of these values for Arbitrum One and Nova, both the block time and the nominal delay for non-express lane transactions, are controlled by governance and are far shorter than the block times seen on other child chains and even competing alternative parent chains (like Solana's 400ms block times).
```

2. Timeboost is purely supplemental to Arbitrum chains. The chain will fall back to the current FCFS ordering policy if (1) Timeboost is turned "off" (trivial, controlled by governance) or (2) if there is no express lane controller for the given round.

3. With Timeboost, the mempool for transactions will continue to be private, which means user protections will continue from harmful MEV-like front-running and sandwich attacks, ensuring a great user experience.

### Does it work with Orbit chains?

Orbit chains can adopt Timeboost, and Orbit chain owners can also choose to use any `ERC20` token for making bids. For example, a chain could accept its token for the auction.

### How does Timeboost affect Orbit chains that settle to Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Nova?

> will introduce a (proposed) 200 ms delay on non-express lane transactions and grant a time advantage/privilege of immediate sequencing of transactions sent by the auction winner. This delay is a new transaction ordering policy at the sequencer level, and, as with many other Nitro tech features, this will be available for Orbit chains to adopt, including those that settle on Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Nova.

Reviewer: This sentence seems to be incomplete.

However, there's probably no meaningful time advantage for the L3's batched transactions data or assertion here. There could be a world where an Orbit chain is incredibly time-sensitive and participates in the Timeboost auctions because they want a faster confirmation that their data and/or assertion gets sequenced on the parent chain. Still, we're talking about a 200 ms difference between the non-express and express lanes.

> ### Does this vote to pass automatically mean that all orbit chains will have Timeboost implemented?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Does this vote passing automatically mean that all orbit chains will have Timeboost implemented?
```

No, Timeboost implementations are at the sequencer level, so if the DAO passes this vote, Timeboost will roll out to the sequencer for Arbitrum One and Nova. This approach is the same strategy for ArbOS upgrades since Orbit chains can choose to adopt Timeboost if they want to - of the voting outcome for adoption on Arbitrum One and Nova.

Technically, the vote passing will mean Orbit L3s settling to Arbitrum One, and Nova will have their batched transaction data and assertions in the parent chain's non-express lane or express lane. Still, Orbit teams can decide whether they want their Orbit chain's sequencer to implement Timeboost. Your chain, your rules.

> ### Does it mean we expect searchers to bid continuously in advance, expecting opportunities to happen 1 minute later, rather than "in real time" opportunities (I see something → I submit an arbitrage tx with priority)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Does it mean we expect searchers to bid continuously in advance, expecting opportunities to happen 1 minute later, rather than "in real time" opportunities (I see something → I submit an arbitrage transaction with priority)?
```

Before answering this question, it is worth clarifying that the participant will likely attempt to predict the amount of MEV generated between 15s and 1min 15s in the future - not 1 minute later. This prediction is because the auction is closed and resolved at a maximum of 15 seconds before the start of the next round (in the current proposal).

> Participants will bid continuously for the right to use the express lane in advance so that they (the participant) can profit from both (1) MEV opportunities they predict between 15s and 1min 15s in the future and (2) MEV opportunities in real-time during the period that the participant is in control of the express lane that they didn't otherwise predict in advance (proposed duration: 1 minute). If the participant does not win control of the express lane, opportunities that they see in real-time are still exploitable, but with a 200ms delay like all other txs (since only the express lane controller's transactions get sequenced with no delay).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Participants will bid continuously for the right to use the express lane in advance so that they (the participants) can profit from both (1) MEV opportunities they predict between 15s and 1min 15s in the future and (2) MEV opportunities in real-time during the period that the participant is in control of the express lane that they didn't otherwise predict (proposed duration: 1 minute). Suppose the participant does not win control of the express lane. In that case, opportunities they see in real-time are still exploitable, but with a 200ms delay like all other transactions (since only the express lane controller's transactions get sequenced with no delay).
```

### When it comes to the implementation and integration, are there any references to Fastlane?

> We acknowledge FastLane's work and the perceived similarity in approach. We believe the design of Timeboost is fundamentally different from FastLane's design. We further believe that both designs aim to solve different problems. We understand that FastLane sold advantage separately for each AMM market and in peer-to-peer transaction propagation. Timeboost, on the other hand, sells an advantage in transaction inclusion timing and, therefore, sells the opportunity to profit from MEV altogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We acknowledge FastLane's work and the perceived similarity between approaches. We believe the design of Timeboost is fundamentally different from FastLane's design. We further believe that both designs aim to solve different problems. We understand that FastLane sold advantage separately for each AMM market and in peer-to-peer transaction propagation. Timeboost, on the other hand, sells an advantage in transaction inclusion timing and, therefore, sells the opportunity to profit from MEV altogether.
```

Delphi Research, a member of the Arbitrum Research and Development Committee (ARDC), has published a great article comparing the transaction ordering policies of various solutions on child chains, including Timeboost, Optimism's Priority Gas Auctions (PGA), Polygon's FastLane, and OEV Network. Here is the [link](https://forum.arbitrum.foundation/t/transaction-ordering-policies-value-accrual-in-l2s-timeboost-op-pga-fastlane-oev-network-ardc-research-deliverables/26771) if you're curious to learn more!

> ### Will the changes [the special rights being asked to be granted to the current sequencer operator] be made without community discussion or through on-chain voting?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Will the changes (the special rights being asked to be granted to the current sequencer operator) be made without community discussion or through on-chain voting?
```

> This AIP is proposing that the current sequencer operator has the autonomy to make the following changes only in circumstances where doing so would enhance Timeboost's long-term stability, preserve or improve the user experience for those using Timeboost-enabled Arbitrum chains, increase the security posture, resiliency, or stability of the chain, and/or otherwise help increase revenue for the ArbitrumDAO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This AIP is proposing that the current sequencer operator has the autonomy to make the following changes only in circumstances where doing so would enhance Timeboost's long-term stability, preserve or improve the user experience for those using Timeboost-enabled Arbitrum chains, increase security, resiliency, or stability of the chain, and/or otherwise help increase revenue for the ArbitrumDAO.
```

### Although Timeboost improves the fairness of the network, the complicated sorting mechanism may affect the transaction experience of some users. It is recommended that Timeboost be implemented with a clearer user interface that allows users to understand the logic of how their transactions are sorted, as well as an optional setting to adjust the sensitivity to the time factor. Are there efforts to address this?

On having a clearer user interface:

> - Users can subscribe to the sequencer feed to view, in real-time, the final order of transactions. This sequencer feed is usable today and in a world where the DAO adopts Timeboost (should the vote pass). Arbitrum chains currently operate with a single sequencer with no public mempool. Today, the logic used to sort transactions is "first-come-first-serve" or FCFS.

Reviewer: "Should the vote pass". Hasn't the vote passed already?

- With Timeboost, the logic changes so that transactions signed by the express lane controller get sequenced immediately (similar to FCFS), while other types of transactions get sequenced with a 200ms (proposed) delay. We believe using the sequencer feed is a sufficient solution for helping users understand the logic behind sorting their transactions. Documentation and diagrams will be forthcoming to help illustrate this workflow.
- On having an optional setting to adjust the sensitivity to the time factor: In this proposal, the ArbitrumDAO can, via governance, change the amount of time that non-express lane transactions get delayed. This parameter, defined as the NonExpressDelayMsec, is denominated in milliseconds and is proposed to be 200ms to start.

### Will there be a testnet for Timeboost?

> Timeboost will be rolled out on private testing-focused devnets and public testnets like Arbitrum Sepolia before Arbitrum One and Nova.

Reviewer: Isn't Timeboost in production now?

The current proposal before the ArbitrumDAO is to implement Timeboost with a centralized sequencer and a single, trusted autonomous auctioneer, which we can define as "Centralized Timeboost." This decision to propose Centralized Timeboost now, without those other variations being ready for production, was made to deliver a form of Timeboost earlier to quickly gather and iterate on feedback received from the market.

### Will Timeboost work with future decentralized Arbitrum Sequencers?

Yes. Timeboost is compatible with the current centralized sequencer and a future design that allows Arbitrum chains to benefit from a decentralized group of sequencers. The current proposal will enable us to deliver Timeboost sooner rather than waiting until the decentralized sequencer design and implementation are complete.

### Will there be plans for a clean user interface that allows users to understand the logic of how their transactions are sorted, as well as an optional setting to adjust the sensitivity to the time factor?

> The first point about a clearer user interface is that users can subscribe to the sequencer feed to view, in real time, the final order of transactions. This sequencer feed is usable both today and in a future world where the DAO adopts Timeboost (should the vote pass) to understand the logic of how transactions get sorted.

Reviewer: Didn't the vote pass?

Arbitrum chains currently operate with a single sequencer with no public mempool. Today, the logic for sorting transactions is "first-come-first-serve," or FCFS. With Timeboost, the logic changes so that transactions signed by the express lane controller are sequenced immediately (similar to FCFS). In contrast, other types of transactions get sequenced with a 200ms (proposed) delay.

> We believe using the sequencer feed is a sufficient solution for helping users understand the logic behind how their transactions get sorted. Documentation and diagrams will be forthcoming to help illustrate this workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We believe using the sequencer feed is a sufficient solution for helping users understand the logic behind how their transactions get sorted. Documentation and diagrams will be provided to help illustrate this workflow.
```

> The second point: in this proposal, the ArbitrumDAO can, via governance, change the amount of delay that non-express lane transactions receive. This parameter, defined as the NonExpressDelayMsec, is denominated in milliseconds and is proposed to be 200ms to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second point: in this proposal, the ArbitrumDAO can, via governance, change the amount of delay that non-express lane transactions receive. This parameter, defined as the `NonExpressDelayMsec`, is denominated in milliseconds and is proposed to be 200ms to start.
```

Collection and monitoring of key metrics will be crucial to evaluating Timeboost's performance and downstream impacts over time. Insights from the analysis could inform how the Arbitrum DAO fine-tunes the various parameters of Timeboost, including the nominal delay for non-express lane transactions (200ms) and the auction duration (1 minute). To support this effort, the AIP states that the following data sources will be saved and made available after Timeboost goes live on Arbitrum One and Arbitrum Nova if this proposal passes:

- Historical bid data for auction participants outside of the two highest bids (that are otherwise posted on-chain)
- A way to label/identify which transactions were sequenced in the express lane (i.e., Timeboosted transactions)

Also mentioned in the AIP is that the long-term performance of Timeboost can only truly be evaluated with real-world data - data that can help hone and fine-tune Timeboost's design for the benefit of the Arbitrum DAO.

### Could Timeboost "break" the chain or reduce its performance or user experience?

> As mentioned in another response, Timeboost is purely additive to an Arbitrum chain's infrastructure. As a result, Timeboost does not pose a risk of "breaking" the chain. A Timeboost-enabled Arbitrum chain will fall back to the current FCFS ordering policy if (1) Timeboost is turned "off" (trivial, controlled by governance) or (2) if there is no express lane controller for the given round. As for your comment about reducing performance or user experience, Arbitrum One and Nova block times will continue to be industry-leading with Timeboost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in another response, Timeboost is purely additive to an Arbitrum chain's infrastructure. As a result, Timeboost does not pose a risk of "breaking" the chain. A Timeboost-enabled Arbitrum chain will fall back to the current FCFS ordering policy if (1) Timeboost is turned "off" (trivial, controlled by governance) or (2) if there is no express lane controller for the given round. When it comes to reducing performance or user experience, Arbitrum One and Nova block times will continue to be industry-leading with Timeboost.
```

2. Timeboost is purely supplemental to Arbitrum chains. The chain will fall back to the current FCFS ordering policy if (1) Timeboost is turned "off" (trivial, controlled by governance) or (2) if there is no express lane controller for the given round.

3. With Timeboost, the mempool for transactions will continue to be private, which means user protections will continue from harmful MEV-like front-running and sandwich attacks, ensuring a great user experience.

### Does it work with Orbit chains?

Orbit chains can adopt Timeboost, and Orbit chain owners can also choose to use any `ERC20` token for making bids. For example, a chain could accept its token for the auction.

### How does Timeboost affect Orbit chains that settle to Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Nova?

> will introduce a (proposed) 200 ms delay on non-express lane transactions and grant a time advantage/privilege of immediate sequencing of transactions sent by the auction winner. This delay is a new <a data-quicklook-from="transaction-ordering-policy">Transaction Ordering Policy</a> at the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer</a> level, and, as with many other Nitro tech features, this will be available for Orbit chains to adopt, including those that settle on Arbitrum One or <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-nova">Arbitrum Nova</a>.

Author: ```suggestion
Timeboost will introduce a (proposed) 200 ms delay on non-express lane transactions and grant a time advantage/privilege of immediate sequencing of transactions sent by the auction winner. This delay is a new <a data-quicklook-from="transaction-ordering-policy">Transaction Ordering Policy</a> at the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer</a> level, and, as with many other Nitro tech features, this will be available for Orbit chains to adopt, including those that settle on Arbitrum One or <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-nova">Arbitrum Nova</a>.
```
